To diagnose retransmissions and potential bottlenecks in your network using Wireshark, you can use a series of display filters and commands. Here’s a comprehensive guide to help you analyze the traffic effectively:
1. Identify Retransmissions

Retransmissions can indicate network issues. Use the following display filters to find them:

    TCP Retransmissions:

    tcp.analysis.retransmission

    This filter shows all TCP packets that have been retransmitted.

    TCP Fast Retransmissions:

    tcp.analysis.fast_retransmission

    This filter highlights packets that were retransmitted quickly, often due to packet loss.

    TCP Duplicate Acknowledgments:

    tcp.analysis.duplicate_ack

    This filter shows duplicate ACKs, which can indicate that packets are being lost.

2. Check for Bottlenecks

To identify potential bottlenecks, you can analyze throughput and latency:

    Throughput Analysis: Use the following filter to view TCP streams:

    tcp.stream eq <stream_number>

    Replace <stream_number> with the specific stream number you want to analyze. You can find the stream number by right-clicking on a TCP packet and selecting "Follow" > "TCP Stream."

    Calculate Round Trip Time (RTT): To analyze RTT, you can use:

    tcp.analysis.rtt

    This will help you visualize the round trip times for TCP packets.

3. Visualize Traffic

Wireshark provides graphical tools to visualize traffic, which can help identify bottlenecks:

    IO Graphs:
        Go to Statistics > IO Graphs.
        Set up graphs to visualize packets per second or bytes per second over time. This can help you spot periods of high traffic or drops in throughput.

4. Analyze TCP Streams

To get detailed information about a specific TCP stream:

    Follow TCP Stream:
        Right-click on a TCP packet and select Follow > TCP Stream. This will show you the entire conversation between the two endpoints, allowing you to analyze the sequence of packets and any retransmissions.

5. Check for Other Issues

    Packet Loss: Use the filter:

    tcp.analysis.lost_segment

    This will show you segments that were lost and not retransmitted.

    Window Size: Analyze the TCP window size to check for flow control issues. Use:

    tcp.window_size

    A consistently small window size can indicate a bottleneck.

6. Export and Analyze Data

If you need to analyze the data further:

    Export Packet Dissections:
        Go to File > Export Packet Dissections > As CSV. This allows you to analyze the data in a spreadsheet for more detailed analysis.
